---
layout: post
title: CSS Flex Layout
date: 2020-04-04
category: CSS
tags: CSS HTML RWD
toc: 
  - name: Basic Concepts
  - name: Initial Behaviors
  - name: Props Apply to Container
  - name: Props Apply to Items
  - name: Props for Space Distribution
  - name: FAQ
  - name: Reference
---

## Basic Concepts 

Before the Flexbox Layout module, there were four layout modes:
- Block, for sections in a webpage
- Inline, for text
- Table, for two-dimensional table data
- Positioned, for explicit position of an element

The flexible box layout module, usually referred to as flexbox,  makes it easier to design flexible **responsive** layout structure without using float or positioning. 
- It was designed as a **one-dimensional** layout model, and as a method that could offer space distribution between items in an interface and powerful alignment capabilities. 
- flexbox deals with layout in one dimension at a time — either as a row or as a column. This can be contrasted with the two-dimensional model of CSS Grid Layout, which controls columns and rows together.
- We need to know terms of two axes — the **main axis** and the **cross axis**. The main axis is defined by the `flex-direction` property, and the cross axis runs perpendicular to it.
- There are two concept entities: Container and Items.

## Initial Behaviors

To create a flex container, set the area's `display` property to `flex`. When we do this, the **direct** children of that container become flex items.

The contents of a new flex container will behave in the following way:

- Items display in a row (the flex-direction property's default is `row`).
- The items start from the start edge of the main axis.
- The items do not stretch on the main dimension but can shrink.
- The items will stretch to fill the size of the cross-axis.
- The `flex-basis` property is set to auto. This means that, in each case, it will be equal to the flex item width in horizontal writing mode, and the flex item height in vertical writing mode. If the corresponding width/height is also set to auto, the flex-basis content value is used instead.
- The `flex-wrap` property is set to nowrap. This means that the flex items will always remain in a single row or column, overflowing their container if their combined width/height exceeds the containing element width/height.

The result of this is that your items will all line up in a row, using the size of the content as their size in the main axis. If there are more items than can fit in the container, they will not wrap but will instead overflow. If some items are taller than others, all items will stretch along the full length of the cross-axis.

## Props Apply to Container

### flex-direction (default is `row`)
It specifies the direction of the flexible items.
It Can be: `row|row-reverse|column|column-reverse|initial|inherit;`

### flex-wrap (default value is `nowrap`)
The `flex-wrap` CSS property sets whether flex items are forced onto one line or can wrap onto multiple lines. 

If wrapping is allowed, it sets the direction that lines are stacked.

### flex-flow
Shorthand for: `flex-direction` and `flex-wrap`

### justify-content

The justify-content property is used to align the items on the **main axis**. 

- `flex-start` (By Default) line the items up at the start edge of the container.
- `flex-end` line the items up at the end.
- `center` line the items up in the center.
- `space-around` items have a half-size space on either end.
- `space-between` cause items to have equal space around them.
- `space-evenly` items have a full-size space on either end.

### align-items

The align-items property will align the items on the **cross axis**.

- `stretch` (By Default) flex items stretch to the height of the flex container. 
- `flex-start` make the items line up at the start of the flex container.
- `flex-end` align the items to the end
- `center` align the items in the center.

## Props Apply to Items

- Need to understand Three properties: `flex-grow`, `flex-shrink`, `flex-basis`. 
- It is recommended to use the `flex` shorthand.
- All the items inside the same flex container will be considered together.

### flex-grow	

The flex-grow sets the flex grow factor, which specifies how much of the flex container's positive free space, **if any**, should be assigned to the flex item's main size.

- A number specifying how much the item will grow **relative** to the rest of the flexible items inside the same container.
- It specifies how much of the **remaining space** in the flex container should be assigned to the item.
- If the flex-grow values differ, the positive free space is distributed according to the ratio defined by the different flex grow factors.
- Initial value	of grow is `0`. 

### flex-shrink	

The `flex-shrink` CSS property sets the flex shrink factor of a flex item. **If** the size of all flex items is larger than the flex container, items shrink to fit according to `flex-shrink`.

- This property deals with situations where the browser calculates the `flex-basis` values of the flex items, and finds that they are too large to fit into the flex container. As long as `flex-shrink` has a positive value the items will shrink in order that they do not **overflow** the container.
- Initial value	of shrink is `1`.

### flex-basis	

Sets the **initial main size** of a flex item. It sets the size of the content box.

- Legal values: 
  - `"auto", "inherit","initial", "content"` or 
  - a number followed by "%", "px", "em" or 
  - any other length unit.
- `flex-basis: content`: Automatically size based on the flex item's content
- `flex-basis: auto`: it will be equal to the flex item main size. (Initial value)
- If `flex-basis` is set to a value other than `auto` and there is a width (or height in case of flex-direction: column) set for that same flex item, the flex-basis value **takes precedence**.

### flex

I recommend using this property, like this: `flex: 0 1 auto`. This saves you from having to guess at all the default values.

It is a shorthand property for:`flex-grow; flex-shrink; flex-basis;`

- `flex: initial` (default value): 
The item is sized according to its width and height properties. It shrinks to its minimum size to fit the container, but does not grow to absorb any extra free space in the flex container. This is equivalent to setting `flex: 0 1 auto`.
- `flex: auto`: 
The item is sized according to its width and height properties, but grows to absorb any extra free space in the flex container, and shrinks to its minimum size to fit the container. This is equivalent to setting `flex: 1 1 auto`.
- `flex: none`: 
The item is sized according to its width and height properties. It is fully inflexible: it neither shrinks nor grows in relation to the flex container. This is equivalent to setting `flex: 0 0 auto`.
- One value: 
  - if it is unitless number, then it refer to `flex-grow`. For example `flex: 1;` equal to `flex-grow: 1`.
  - like this: `flex: 10em; flex: 30%; flex: min-content;`, refer to `flex-basis: 10em`.
- two value:
  - `flex: 1 30px` refer to `flex-grow | flex-basis`
  - `flex: 2 2` refer to `flex-grow | flex-shrink`
- `flex: 1`: allow a flex item to grow and shrink as needed, ignoring its initial size.

## FAQ

### How to Both Horizontally & Vertically locate a item

Common way is put the item to a container like following:
```css
.container {
  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
  align-items: center;
}
```

## Reference

- The [mdn document](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout/Basic_concepts_of_flexbox) give the detail.


