---
layout: post
title: CSS Basic Concepts
date: 2020-07-07
category: CSS
tags: CSS
toc: 
  - name: CSS selector
  - name: Variable
  - name: CSS Keywords
  - name: Length unit
  - name: At-rules
  - name: Media Query
---

## CSS selector

The First concept of CSS should be selector.

A CSS rule consists of a selector and a declaration block.
{% include figure.html path="assets/img/selector_css.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

CSS selectors are used to 'find' (or call select) the HTML element you want to style.
We can divide CSS selectors into five categories: 
simple, combinator, pseudo-class, pseuso-elements, attribute selector.

In short, we have following selector: 
- Simple: `name, #id, .class, *, group`
- Combinator: `space, >, +, ~`
- Pseudo-class: `:`
- Pseudo-elements: `::`
- Attribute: `[]`

### Simple selectors 
- based on element name,
- use element id, call id selector, start with `#`. 
- for class selector, start with `.`
- for all the elements, use `*`
- group selector: 
```css
h1, h2 , p{
  color: blue;
}
```

### Combinator selectors 

Select elements based on a specific relationship between them.

There are 4 combinators:
1. descendant selector (space)
The following example selects all `<p>` elements inside `<div>` elements: 
```css
div p {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```

2. child selector (>)
The child selector selects all elements that are the children of a specified element.
The following example selects all `<p>` elements that are children of a `<div>` element:
```css
div > p {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```

3. adjacent sibling selector (+)
The adjacent sibling selector is used to select an element that is directly after another specific element.
The following example selects the first `<p>` element that are placed immediately after `<div>` elements:
```css
div + p {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```

4. behinding sibling selector (~)
The general sibling selector selects all elements that are next siblings of a specified element.
The following example selects all `<p>` elements that are next siblings of `<div>` elements: 
```css
div ~ p {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```

### Pseudo-class selectors 
Select elements based on a certain state. For example, it can be used to 
- Style an element when a user mouses over it: `a:hover`, Selects links on mouse over.
- Style an element when it gets focus. `input:focus `  Selects the `<input>` element that has focus

Syntax like this:
```css
selector:pseudo-class {
  property: value;
}
```

There are around 30 Pseudo-class. Some popular are:
```css
:hover        a:hover        Selects links on mouse over
:active       a:active       Selects the active link
:root         root           Selects the document's root element
:focus        input:focus    Selects the <input> element that has focus
:visited      a:visited      Selects all visited links
:not(...)     :not(p)        Selects every element that is not a <p> element
:nth-child(n) p:nth-child(2) Selects every <p> element that is the second child of its parent
```

##### Example1: (link and visited are pseudo-class)
```css
/* unvisited link */
a:link {
  color: #FF0000;
}
/* visited link */
a:visited {
  color: #00FF00;
}
```

##### Example2: (first-child is pseudo-class)
The selector matches any `<p>` element that is the first child of any other element: 
```css
p:first-child {
  color: blue;
}
```
the selector matches the first `<i>` element in all `<p>` elements:
```css
p i:first-child {
  color: blue;
}
```

##### Example3: Simple Tooltip Hover
```html
<style>
.showupwhenhover {
  display: none;
  background-color: yellow;
  padding: 20px;
}
div:hover .showupwhenhover {
  display: block;
}
</style>
<div>Hover over this div element to show the p element
  <p class='showupwhenhover'>Tada! Here I am!</p>
</div>
```

### Pseudo-elements selectors 
Select and style a part of an element. 
For example, it can be used to 
- Style the first letter, or line, of an element; 
- Insert content before, or after, the content of an element.

There are totally 6 pseudo-elements:
```css
::after	       p::after	        Insert something after the content of each <p> element
::before       p::before        Insert something before the content of each <p> element
::first-letter p::first-letter  Selects the first letter of each <p> element
::first-line   p::first-line    Selects the first line of each <p> element
::marker       ::marker         Selects the markers of list items
::selection    p::selection     Selects the portion of an element that is selected by a user
```

##### Example1: (The `::first-line` is Pseudo-element)
The `::first-line` pseudo-element is used to add a special style to the first line of a text.
The following example formats the first line of the text in all `<p>` elements:
```css
p::first-line {
  color: #ff0000;
  font-variant: small-caps;
}
```

##### Example2: (The `::before` is pseudo-element)
The `::before` pseudo-element can be used to insert some content before the content of an element.
The following example inserts an image before the content of each `<h1>` element:
```css
h1::before {
  content: url(smiley.gif);
}
```

##### Example3
The `::marker` selects the markers of **list** items.
the marker will go to 'red' color for list below:
```html
<style>
::marker { 
  color: red;
}
</style>
<ul>
  <li>Coffee</li>
  <li>Tea</li>
  <li>Milk</li>
</ul>
```

### Attribute selectors 
Select elements based on an attribute or attribute value. 
The following example selects all `<a>` elements with a `target="_blank"` attribute:
```css
a[target="_blank"] {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```
We also have:
[attribute~="value"], [attribute|="value"] ,[attribute^="value"] , [attribute$="value"], [attribute*="value"] 

## Variable

CSS support variable.

Define variables in the :root pseudo-class:
```css
:root {  
  --red: #ff6f69;  
  --beige: #ffeead;  
  --yellow: #ffcc5c;  
}
```

Then youcan use them:
```css
html, body {  
  background: var(--beige);  
  color: var(--red);  
}
h1, p {  
  color: var(--red);  
}
```

## CSS Keywords 

“Initial”, “Inherit” and “Unset”

### Initial

- The initial keyword tells the browser to use the CSS default value of the given property. 
- But HTML elements do not have initial style values! The basic styles of an HTML element, such as the `<h1>` tag for example, comes from the browser user agent stylesheet. 
- User-agent styles are the basic styles that the browser applies to HTML elements in the browser. 

- For example: The color property’s initial value will always be black

### Inherit

- The keyword value of inherit tells the browser to search for the closest parent element’s value and let the current element inherit that value.

### Unset

- In CSS, there are two types of properties: Inherited properties and Non-inherited properties.
- The unset keyword is unique in that it works differently on different types of properties. 
- The unset value works the same as inherit for inherited properties types.
- For non-inherited properties, the unset will work the same as the initial value, that is, apply the CSS default value

> Why Use Unset if it Works Exactly the Same as Inherit and Initial?
Nowadays we have a new property called all which brings with it a new capability: to reset both all of the inherited properties and the non-inherited properties at once!
Applying the unset value to the all property will reset all the inherited properties to inherit and all of the non-inherited properties to initial.

## Length unit

1. height, width can be: 
```css
750%,
80px,
auto
inherit
```

2. also, we have: 
```css
max-width: 100%;
max-height: 90px;
min-width
min-height
```

3. relative length unit
- `em`, relative to the font-size of element. 
- `rem`, relative to the font-size of root element.
`em`, `rem` are practical in creating perfectly scalable layout.
- `vw`, relative to 1% of the width of viewport;
- `vh`, relateive to 1% of the height of viewport;
the funny part of vw, vh is that , they will change when viewport change. 
- `vmin` relative to 1% of the smaller dimension. (if width is smaller, then relative to width)
- `vmax` relative to 1% of the larger dimentsion
- `%` relative to the parent element. 

4. absolute length unit
`cm, mm, in, px, pt, pc`

## At-rules

At-rules are CSS statements that instruct CSS how to behave. They begin with an at sign, '@' (U+0040 COMMERCIAL AT), followed by an identifier and includes everything up to the next semicolon, ';' (U+003B SEMICOLON), or the next CSS block, whichever comes first.
```css
/* General structure */
@identifier (RULE);

/* Example: tells browser to use UTF-8 character set */
@charset "utf-8";
```

### There are several regular at-rules, each with a different syntax:
- @charset — Defines the character set used by the style sheet.
- @import — Tells the CSS engine to include an external style sheet.
- @namespace — Tells the CSS engine that all its content must be considered prefixed with an XML namespace.

### More
- @media — A conditional group rule that will apply its content if the device meets the criteria of the condition defined using a media query.
- @scope - A conditional group rule that will apply its content if the device meets the criteria of the given condition.
- @starting-style - A conditional group rule that will apply starting transition if the browser meets the criteria of the given condition.
- @supports — A conditional group rule that will apply its content if the browser meets the criteria of the given condition.
- @page — Describes the aspect of layout changes that will be applied when printing the document.
- @font-face — Describes the aspect of an external font to be downloaded.
- @keyframes — Describes the aspect of intermediate steps in a CSS animation sequence.
- @counter-style — Defines specific counter styles that are not part of the predefined set of styles.
- @font-feature-values (plus @swash, @ornaments, @annotation, @stylistic, @styleset and @character-variant) — Define common names in font-variant-alternates for feature activated differently in OpenType.
- @property — Describes the aspect of custom properties and variables.
- @layer – Declares a cascade layer and defines the order of precedence in case of multiple cascade layers.

## Media Query

- Media query uses the `@media` rule to include a block of CSS properties only if a certain condition is true.
- Media queries are a popular technique for delivering a tailored style sheet (responsive web design) to desktops, laptops, tablets, and mobile phones.
- Media query is a CSS technique introduced in CSS3.

-- Media queries can be used to check many things, such as:
- width and height of the viewport
- width and height of the device
- orientation (is the tablet/phone in landscape or portrait mode?)
- resolution

Example
- Web page looks like this on Desktop: 

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/css-mediaquery1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
- We can add a breakpoint where certain parts of the design will behave differently on each side of the breakpoint.
- Now we Use a media query to add a breakpoint at 768px:
```css
@media only screen and (max-width: 768px) {
  /* For mobile phones: */
  [class*="col-"] {
    width: 100%;
  }
}
```
{% include figure.html path="assets/img/css-mediaquery2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

### How to use Media query
Very easy to use, Just add following CSS:
```css
@media screen and (max-width: 550px) {
  .card {
    flex-direction: column;
  }
}
```
Then browser can change `.card` class content as above when screen width less than `550px`.

### What are container queries

(https://blog.logrocket.com/css-container-queries-guide)

- CSS container queries allow us to style an element with regard to its parent or container size (width and height). 

- Container queries differ from media queries in the sense that media queries target the viewport (width and height) of the web browser in order to apply the style to an element.

- CSS container queries enables designers to create webpages that are very responsive by ensuring that styles are applied to components based on their width and height and not based on the viewport of the full page.

- The effect of Container query is very similar to Media query.

### How to use container queries

- Similar to Media query. But a little bit complicated.
- card class should be inside card-container class. 
- It need container-type
- container-name is optional
- Looks like this:
```css
.card-container {
  container-type: inline-size;
  container-name: cardContainer;
}
.card {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: row;
 }
@container (max-width: 500px) {
  .card {
    flex-direction: column;
  }
}
```

- When the width of The container witch with cardContainer class is less than 500px, when card class will change accordingly. 
