---
layout: post
title: "Understand <code>this</code> in JS"
date: 2021-05-03
categories: JavaScript
tags: object 
---

`this` keyword locate at the core JavaScript language. It has some differences between strict mode and non-strict mode. in nonstrict mode, is refer to an object and in strict mode can be any value. 

Main points:
- The value of `this` is a property of an execution context (global, function or eval)
- In most cases, the value of `this` is determined by how a function is called (runtime binding). 
- It can't be set by assignment during execution, and it may be different each time the function is called.
- In function execution context, it have been setup two parameters: `this`, and arguments keywords. 
- In an object method, `this` refers to the object.
- In the global execution context (outside of any function), this refers to the global object whether in strict mode or not. 
  - You can always easily get the global object using the global `globalThis` property, regardless of the current context in which your code is running.

- Inside a function, the value of this depends on how the function is called(runtime binding).
  - In non strict mode, return a globe object:
```javascript
function f1() {
  return this;
}
// In a browser:
f1() === window; // true
// In Node:
f1() === globalThis; // true
```
  - In strict mode, if the value of this is not set when entering an execution context, it remains as undefined:
```javascript
function f2() {
  'use strict'; // see strict mode
  return this;
}
f2() === undefined; // true
```
  The value of this is undefined, because f2 was called directly and not as a method or property of an object (e.g. window.f2())

- inside a constructor function
```javascript
function person (name, age){
  this.name = name;
  this.age = age;
}
let tom = new person(“Tom”, 30);
```
This refer to the new object ‘tom’. More info, go to new keyword topic.

- In an event, this refers to the element that received the event.

- Methods like `call()`, `apply()`, and `bind()` can refer this to any object.
  - ES5 introduced the `bind()` method to set the value of a function's this regardless of how it's called

- In Arrow function
  - arrow functions don't provide their own this binding (it retains the this value of the enclosing lexical context).
  - in regular function, 'this' keyword will represent the object which call the function. it can be a window , button or whatever. 
  - in arrow function, ‘this’ will always represent the object which defined the arrow function.

- in Class context, similar with function , but some differences: 
  - Within a class constructor, this is a regular object;
  - All non-static methods within the class are added to the prototype of this.


