---
layout: post
title: FQA in CSS
date: 2023-04-21
category: CSS
tags: Flex Layout CSS
---

## viewport units

### why height: 50% is not working? 
need to do following first: 
body {
height: 100vh; 
}

### what is vh? 
Viewport-percentage Height, also , we have vw, vmin, vmax
vh unit, equal to 1% of the height of initial containing block. 
or use height: 50vh, it is working! 
They are working well elegantly!

### The problems with viewport units
`vh, vw` work well in laptop, but not in some mobile. This depond on mobile OS and browser. Now `dvh, svh, lvh` are designed for this issue.



## Show button on hover only
When hover a todo item, then show the delete button: 
```css
.hover_button {
  display: none;
}
label:hover + .hover_button, .hover_button:hover {
  display: inline-block;
}
```
HTML:
```html
<li >
  <label>
    this is the todo item
  </label>
  <button className=" hover_button">Del</button>
</li>
```
By doing this, we're using the adjacent sibling css selector `+`. The selector is pretty simple: on label "hovering", you select .hover_button (its sibling) and display it. Here, I added .hover_button:hover so that when the user "hovers" the button, it keeps it visible (prevent a blinking effect as the user moves the mouse over the button).

## Using CSS framework
[tailwindcss](https://tailwindcss.com/)

A utility-first CSS framework packed with classes like `flex`, `pt-4`, `text-center` and `rotate-90` that can be composed to build any design, directly in your markup.

## Achieving Fluid Typography with clamp()

One of the most common use cases for `clamp()` is fluid typography. It allows us to create responsive text that scales proportionally based on the viewport size. By defining minimum and maximum font sizes, we can ensure readability while adapting to different screen sizes.

Let’s consider an example where we want the font size to scale between 16 pixels and 24 pixels, with a preferred size of 3 viewport width units:

`font-size: clamp(16px, 3vw, 24px);`

In this scenario, the browser will adjust the font size dynamically based on the available space, striving to maintain the preferred size of 3vw. If the viewport becomes narrower, the font size will decrease, but it will never go below 16 pixels. Similarly, if the viewport expands, the font size will increase, but it will never exceed 24 pixels.
