---
layout: post
title: Handle Error in JavaScript
date: 2024-09-19
category: JavaScript
tags: JavaScript 
---

A cleaner and more consistent error handling way is that define your own error types deriving from `Error` to be able to throw new `MyError()` and use `instanceof MyError` to check the kind of error in the exception handler. This results in cleaner and more consistent error handling code.


## Error Overview
- `Error` is Standard built-in objects.
- `Error` objects are thrown when runtime errors occur. 
- Usually you create an `Error` object with the intention of raising it using the `throw` keyword. You can handle the error using the `try...catch` construct
- Error types: Besides the **generic `Error` constructor**, there are still: EvalError, TypeError, etc. in JavaScript.
- The `Error` object can also be used as a base object for user-defined exceptions.


## Error Instance properties

### Error.prototype.constructor

syntax: `new Error(message, options)`
JavaScript only tries to read `options.cause` if `options` is an object.

> Note: Error() can be called with or without new. Both create a new Error instance.

```js
const x = Error("I was created using a function call!");
// above has the same functionality as following
const y = new Error('I was constructed via the "new" keyword!');
```

### Error.prototype.name
The `name` data property of `Error.prototype` is shared by all Error instances. It represents the name for the type of error.

### Error.cause
The `cause` data property of an Error instance indicates the specific original cause of the error.

It is used when catching and re-throwing an error with a more-specific or useful error message in order to still have access to the original error.

The value of cause can be of any type.

### Error: message
The `message` data property of an Error instance is a human-readable description of the error.

The `message` property combined with the `name` property is used by the `Error.prototype.toString()` method to create a string representation of the Error.

### Error.prototype.stack
This feature is non-standard, but it is de facto implemented by all major JavaScript engines, and the JavaScript standards committee is looking to standardize it. 

- The value of `stack` is **string**.
- you can assume it exists and use it for **debugging** purposes.
- The `stack` property of an Error instance offers a trace of which functions were called, in what order, from which line and file, and with what arguments. 
- The stack string proceeds from the most recent calls to earlier ones, leading back to the original global scope call.
- Each JavaScript engine uses its own format for stack traces, but they are fairly consistent in their high-level structure. 

Example:
```js
function trace() {
  throw new Error("trace() failed");
}
function b() {
  trace();
}
function a() {
  b(3, 4, "\n\n", undefined, {});
}
try {
  a("first call, firstarg");
} catch (e) {
  document.getElementById("output").textContent = e.stack;
}
```
then you can see in `output` element:
```
Error: trace() failed
    at trace (<anonymous>:2:9)
    at b (<anonymous>:5:3)
    at a (<anonymous>:8:3)
    at <anonymous>:11:3
    at init (https://live.mdnplay.dev/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Error/stack/runner.html?id=using_the_stack_property:133:23)
    at https://live.mdnplay.dev/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Error/stack/runner.html?id=using_the_stack_property:146:17
```

## How to Differentiate between similar errors

Sometimes a block of code can fail for reasons that require different handling, but which throw very similar errors (i.e. with the same type and message).

If you don't have control over the original errors that are thrown, one option is to catch them and throw new Error objects that have more specific messages.

```js
function doWork() {
  try {
    doFailSomeWay();
  } catch (err) {
    throw new Error("Failed in some way", { cause: err });
  }
  try {
    doFailAnotherWay();
  } catch (err) {
    throw new Error("Failed in another way", { cause: err });
  }
}

try {
  doWork();
} catch (err) {
  switch (err.message) {
    case "Failed in some way":
      handleFailSomeWay(err.cause);
      break;
    case "Failed in another way":
      handleFailAnotherWay(err.cause);
      break;
  }
}
```
 
## A good way to extend Error

Read more at [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1382107/whats-a-good-way-to-extend-error-in-javascript).

Best way is using class and extend. But you can still use function.

### Use class
Use `class` and `extend` keywords to subclass Error constructor:
```js
class MyError extends Error {
  constructor(message) {
    super(message);
    this.message = message;
    this.name = 'MyError';
  }
}
```
There is no need for `this.stack = (new Error()).stack;` trick thanks to `super()` call.

For ease of maintaining, use `this.name = this.constructor.name;` instead.
Try this:
```js
class MyError extends Error {
  constructor(message) {
    super(message);
    this.message = message;
    //this.name = 'MyError';
    this.name = this.constructor.name;
  }
}
```

### Use function
```js
function MyError (message){
  this.message = message;
  this.name = 'MyError';
  Error.captureStackTrace(this);
}
// does the same magic as extends keyword
Object.setPrototypeOf(MyError.prototype, Error.prototype);
```

### Test result
```js
try{
  throw new MyError('this is test');
}catch(e){
  // true
  if(e instanceof Error){
    console.log(e)
  }
  // true
  if(e instanceof MyError){
    console.log(e)
  }
}
```

## FAQ

- what is `stack` proerpty.