---
layout: post
title: Python Overview
date: 2024-12-11
categories: Python
tags: Python JavaScript
toc:
  - name: Python vs. JavaScript
    subsections:
      - name: REPL
      - name: Code Blocks
      - name: Data type
      - name: Class
      - name: iterable, iterator
      - name: generator
      - name: Static method
  - name: FAQ
    subsections:
      - name: _ underscore in Python
      - name: loop, if, elif, else
      - name: What do asterisk operator means in Python
      - name: Multiple assignment
      - name: Get detail of How do Python run the code
      - name: How to test speed of some code?
      - name: Expressions vs. statements?
      - name: How to Import Another File in Python
      - name: What is pickling and unpickling in Python?
      - name: What is PyPI, pip, PyPy
      - name: What is IPython, Jupyter
---


- Python is an object oriented programming language.
- Almost everything in Python is an object, with its properties and methods.
- A Class is like an object constructor, or a "blueprint" for creating objects.
- Different from JavaScript, there are no primitives in Python. 
- Python have a good documentation.

## Python vs. JavaScript

### REPL
REPL(Read-Eval-Print-Loop)
- Python has it's own interpreter. And Python have different version interpreter. For example Pythone 2.7 still popular, but the new stable version is 3.10 at the moment. something like: python3 yourcode.py
- JavaScript need a JavaScript runtime to support, like Browser, NodeJS. 

### Code Blocks
- JavaScript makes use of curly brackets for defining code blocks. Python, on the other hand, uses indentation for defining code blocks. 
- While JavaScript has the semi-colon (;) that serves as the statement terminator (though it is not mandatory), Python uses a newline.

### Data type

#### Mutability
- Python support mutable data type, like set, and immutable data type, like list. 
- JavaScript have primitive type concept which are immutable. All object is mutable. But each property of the object have it's own descriptor which can config the mutability of the property.

#### Number
- In python, there are different numeric type like int, float, fixed-point decimal.
- In JavaScript, there are number and bigInt. Number type is double floating point number.

#### Object

- Objects are Python’s abstraction for data. All data in a Python program is represented by objects or by relations between objects. (Everything in python is object)
- Is it everything is object in JavaScript? NO, primitive is not object. 
- Object in JavaScript, is very easy to create. But in Python, Each object has a class from which it is instantiated.

In JavaScript, a simple iterator can be: 
```js
let myIter = {
  n: 0,
  next: function() {
    return (value: this.n++, done: false);
  }
}
```

In Python, a iterator looks like:
```py
class MyNumbers:
  def __iter__(self):
    self.n = 0
    return self

  def __next__(self):
    self.n += 1
    return self.n

myclass = MyNumbers()
myiter = iter(myclass)
next(myiter)
```

### Class

#### JavaScript class
- JavaScript class, which have been described as syntax sugar, is build on the top of prototype chain.
- JavaScript class works very well. You don’t need to always translate back to prototype chain to understand the code. 
- JavaScript actually implement class as function. 
- JavaScript class support class, new, constructor, extends, super, static key words. JavaScript class put everything in one place, to implement OOP coding concept which similar to Java, C++. 

#### Python class
- Each value is an object. Each object is an instance of a class. Even a class is an instance of the metaclass - type. 
- class itself is an object. class instance is an object too. 
- class in python is not function. 
- Method object is not Function object in Python! But they are same thing in JavaScript.
- Python supports a form of multiple inheritance. But JavaScript support just one.

### iterable, iterator

#### JavaScript
- An object is iterable if it implement the @@iterator method.
- An object is iterator when it implements the `next()` according to some semantics:
`done_value_object = myIterator.next(). `
// if done == false, can keep calling `myIterator.next()` to return done_value_object.
// if done == true, then iterator is completed.  

#### Python
Python have different concepts of iterator and iterable from JavaScript. 

- exception StopIteration is used to signal the end of an iteration.
- built-in function `iter()` and `next()` used to implement iteration.

### generator

#### JavaScript generator
- syntax: `* function (){}`
- generator is an iterator which maintain by the language itself.
- a generator object (iterator) for the function will be returned when meet yield.
- yield will return value. 
- generator function also support return keyword. generator function will totally complete when return. 
- generator can work with promise to make code better.

#### Python generator
- syntax: when a function contain keyword yield, then it is generator.
- If you used `next()` after iteration have been completed, then you’ll get an explicit StopIteration exception.

### Static method

static concept is similar between Python, JavaScript, C++, Java. 
static methods can be accessed from classes instead of instants. 

#### in JavaScript 
- there are static keyword. 
- static method can’t be access by instance. 

#### in Python 
- Using built-in function staticmethod() to turn method to static. But can using syntaxtic sugar decorator @staticmethod

- static methods can be access both by class and instance. 
`Class.staticmethodFunc()`
or even
`Class().staticmethodFunc()`


## FAQ

### User input
Python allows for user input.
That means we are able to ask the user for input.
```py
username = input("Enter username:")
print("Username is: " + username)
```
`input()` function always return string.

### _ underscore in Python
- Underscore (_) is valid for making identifier in Python. Just like 0-9, a-z, A-Z. 
- There are some traditional usage, like 

#### ignore values:
```py
a, *_, b = (7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1)
print(a, b)
```

#### lopping ten times using _
```py
for _ in range(5):
    print(_)
```

#### Separating Digits of Numbers:
```py
million = 1_000_000
binary = 0b_0010
octa = 0o_64
hexa = 0x_23_ab

print(million)
print(binary)
print(octa)
print(hexa)
```

#### Naming Using Underscore(_)
Underscore(_) can be used to name variables, functions and classes, etc..,

Single Pre Underscore: `_variable`:
It is used for internal use.
For example you import all the methods and names from my_functions.py, Python doesn't import the names which starts with a single pre underscore. 

Single Post Underscore: `variable_`:
You can avoid conflicts with the Python Keywords by adding an underscore at the end of the name which you want to use.

Double Pre Underscores: `__variable`:
It is used for the name mangling.
Double Pre Underscores tells the Python interpreter to rewrite the attribute name of subclasses to avoid naming conflicts.

```py
class Sample():
    def __init__(self):
        self.a = 1
        self._b = 2
        self.__c = 3
obj1 = Sample()
dir(obj1)

['_Sample__c', '__class__',... '_b', 'a']

```

Double Pre and Post Underscores:- `__variable__`:
In Python, you will find different names which start and end with the double underscore. They are called as magic methods. stay away from them.


### loop, if, elif, else

All these keyword in Python and JavaScript are come from C language. They are very similar. 

#### Loop
- Python support while and for..in. 
- The while is same with while in JavaScript.
- The for..in is similar with for..of in JavaScript.
- Both while and for..in Support break, continue keyword. No return keyword inside loop! It is same with JavaScript. 
- Both loops support else keyword. But JavaScript is not support.

#### if, elif, else
Python use elif. JavaScrpt use else if. 

### What do asterisk operator means in Python

#### For numeric data type, * is used for multiplication.

For sequences such as string, list and tuple, * is a repetition operator
```bash
>>> s="Hello"
>>> s*3
'HelloHelloHello'
```

packing arguments given to function 
`*` for Positional arguments and `**` for keyword arguments.
```py
from random import randint
def roll(*dice):
    return sum(randint(1, die) for die in dice)

print(roll(4, 5, 6))
```

#### What do *-on-its-own in parameter means
like sorted built-in function: 
`sorted(iterable, /, *, key=None, reverse=False) `

The `*` enforce that the arguments after `*` must be specified as keyword arguments. Not accept positional arguments any more.

#### unpack sequence or collection
The single star * unpacks the sequence/collection into positional arguments, so you can do this:
```py
def sum(a, b):
    return a + b
values = (1, 2)
s = sum(*values)

num_list = [1,2,3,4,5]
num_list_2 = [6,7,8,9,10]
new_list = [*num_list, *num_list_2]
# [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]

name = ['levin', 'middlename', 'another middle', 'wen']
first, *middle, last = name
print(middle) # ['middlename', 'another middle']
```

The double star ** uppacks the dictionary and thus named arguments:
```py
values = { 'a': 1, 'b': 2 }
s = sum(**values)

# will execute as:
s = sum(a=1, b=2)
```

pleace * prior to an iterator, it will unpack the iterator.

For example, zip() is a lazy function which return an iterator of tuples. 
When `zip()` in conjunction with the * operator can be used to unzip a list:
```bash
>>> x = [1, 2, 3]
>>> y = [4, 5, 6]
>>> list(zip(x, y))
[(1, 4), (2, 5), (3, 6)]
>>> x2, y2 = zip(*zip(x, y))
>>> x == list(x2) and y == list(y2)
True
```

#### pack value
We can pack several values into one variable (list) using the * operator:
```py
*names, = 'Michael', 'John', 'Nancy'
# names 
['Michael', 'John', 'Nancy']
# (The reason for using a trailing comma after *names is because the left side of the assignment must be a tuple or list. when pack into list, need * and , ) try this:
*names, other = 'Michael', 'John', 'Nancy'
# names 
['Michael', 'John']
# other
'Nancy'

# Or pack them into a tuple: 

names = 'Michael', 'John', 'Nancy'
# names 
('Michael', 'John', 'Nancy')
```

### Multiple assignment

#### Assign multiple values to multiple variables
```py
a, b, c = 0.1, 100, 'string'

a = 100, 200
print(a)# (100, 200)
print(type(a))# <class 'tuple'>

# a, b = 100, 200, 300 # ValueError
# a, b, c = 100, 200 # ValueError

a, *b = 100, 200, 300
print(b)# [200, 300]
print(type(b))# <class 'list'>
```

#### Assign the same value to multiple variables
`a = b = c = 'string' # usually no problem`

But assign mutable object, usually that is not what you expect:
```py
a = b = [0, 1, 2]
a[0] = 10
print(b) # [100, 1, 2]
```

### Get detail of How do Python run the code

#### Using cProfile.run(): 
```py
import cProfile
cProfile.run('sum([i * 2 for i in range(10000)])') # list comprehension
```

you will get information below:
```
5 function calls in 0.001 seconds

   Ordered by: standard name

   ncalls  tottime  percall  cumtime  percall filename:lineno(function)
        1    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001 <string>:1(<listcomp>)
        1    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.001 <string>:1(<module>)
        1    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.001 {built-in method builtins.exec}
        1    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000 {built-in method builtins.sum}
        1    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000 {method 'disable' of '_lsprof.Profiler' objects}
```
another example:
`cProfile.run('sum((i * 2 for i in range(10000)))') # generator comprehension`

#### Get variable size of memory sys.getsizeof():
```bash
>>> import sys
>>> nums_squared_lc = [i ** 2 for i in range(10000)]
>>> sys.getsizeof(nums_squared_lc)
87624
>>> nums_squared_gc = (i ** 2 for i in range(10000))
>>> print(sys.getsizeof(nums_squared_gc))
120
```

### How to test speed of some code?

Following codes are get the time which have been spend on running the codes. and You can get which code is faster. f-string format is faster than modulo, .format(). 
```bash
>>> import timeit
>>> timeit.timeit("""name = "Eric"
... age = 74
... '%s is %s.' % (name, age)""", number = 10000)
0.003324444866599663

>>> timeit.timeit("""name = "Eric"
... age = 74
... f'{name} is {age}.'""", number = 10000)
0.0024820892040722242

>>> timeit.timeit("""name = "Eric"
... age = 74
... f'{name} is {age}.'""", number = 10000)
0.0024820892040722242

```

### Expressions vs. statements?

#### Expressions
Expressions only contain identifiers, literals and operators (where operators include arithmetic and boolean operators, the function call operator () the subscription operator [] and similar), and can be reduced to some kind of "value", which can be any Python object. Examples:
```py
3 + 5
map(lambda x: x*x, range(10))
[a.x for a in some_iterable]
yield 7
```
#### Statements 
Statements, on the other hand, are everything that can make up a line (or several lines) of Python code. Note that expressions are statements as well. Examples:
```py
# all the above expressions
print 42
if x: do_y()
return
a = 7
```

### How to Import Another File in Python

#### If same directory, can import directly.
`import otherpythonfile`

#### Add the path of your .py files to sys.path
When a module named mymodule is imported, the interpreter first searches for a built-in module with that name. If not found, it then searches for a file named mymodule.py in a list of directories given by the variable sys.path.

`sys.path` is initialized from these locations: 
1. current directory, 
2. PYTHONPATH, 
3. installation default.

So, after you add path to the sys.path, you are supposed to make it:
```py
import sys
import os
sys.path.append(os.path.abspath("/home/el/foo4/stuff"))
```
#### __init__.py
add a empty file `__init__.py` to each directory which your_import_file.py located. 
It works perfectly!

### What is pickling and unpickling in Python?

- The Python pickle is defined as a module which accepts any Python object and converts it into a string representation. 
- It dumps the Python object into a file using the dump function; this process is called Pickling.
- The process of retrieving the original Python objects from the stored string representation is called as Unpickling.

### What is PyPI, pip, PyPy

- PyPI (/ˌpaɪpiˈaɪ/) (Python Package Index), is the official third-party software repository for Python.
Some package managers, including pip, use PyPI as the default source for packages and their dependencies.
- pip is the package manager for Python. You can use pip to install packages from the Python Package Index and other indexes. Just like npm for JS.
- PyPy (/ˈpaɪpaɪ/) is an implementation of the Python programming language. PyPy often runs faster than the standard implementation CPython because PyPy uses a just-in-time compiler.

### What is IPython, Jupyter

#### IPython
IPython (Interactive Python) is a command shell for interactive computing in multiple programming languages, originally developed for the Python programming language, that offers introspection, rich media, shell syntax, tab completion, and history.

IPython provides a rich architecture for interactive computing with:

- A powerful interactive shell.
- A kernel for Jupyter.
- Support for interactive data visualization and use of GUI toolkits.
- Flexible, embeddable interpreters to load into your own projects.
- Easy to use, high performance tools for parallel computing.

#### Project Jupyter
Project Jupyter (/ˈdʒuːpɪtər/ (listen)) is a project to develop open-source software, open standards, and services for interactive computing across multiple programming languages. 
- It was spun off from IPython in 2014 by Fernando Pérez and Brian Granger. 
- Project Jupyter's name is a reference to the three core programming languages supported by Jupyter, which are Julia, Python and R. 
- Project Jupyter has developed and supported the interactive computing products Jupyter Notebook, JupyterHub, and JupyterLab.

### Try not use global variable. 
```py
global_var = 10
def foo(x):
  print(global_var) # here will try to access the local variable global_var, but not defined.
  global_var = x
  print(global_bar)
```
The code above will cause error in python.  

### Compare arrays, Dictionarys, sets, strings

Python will compare the elements inside, so if all the elements same, then they are equal.
 ```py
array1 = [1, 2, 3]
array2 = [1, 2, 3]
array1 == array2 // True

dict1 = {'x': 500, 'y': 5874, 'z': 560}
dict2 = {'x': 500, 'y': 5874, 'z': 560}
dict1 == dict2 // True

set1 = {1,2,3,6,'x'}
set2 = {1,2,3,6,'x'}
set1 == set2 // True

str1 = 'Gandhiewrnagar'
str2 = 'Gandhiewrnagar'
print(str1 == str2)// True. Even id() is same when string not long enough. (string interning)
```

Even nested collection, Python will check deep as well!

This is **different from JavaScript**. When you compare two arrays using the `==` operator in JavaScript, you are actually comparing the object references rather than the contents of the arrays. 



