---
layout: post
title: Implement CSS in React
date: 2024-02-17
category: CSS
tags: CSS JavaScript React Sass
toc: 
  - name: Inline Styling
  - name: CSS file
  - name: CSS Modules
  - name: CSS-in-JS
  - name: Using Sass in React
---

The bese way to use CSS in React, should be using CSS files.

## Inline Styling

{% raw %}
- Using two sets of curly braces `{{}}`.
- CSS properties with hyphen separators, like background-color, must be written with camel case syntax:
```js
const Header = () => {
  return (
    <>
      <h1 style={{backgroundColor: "lightblue"}}>Hello Style!</h1>
    </>
  );
}
```
{% endraw %}

- Use JavaScript Object:
```js
const Header = () => {
  const myStyle = {
    backgroundColor: "DodgerBlue",
    fontFamily: "Sans-Serif"
  };
  return (
    <>
      <h1 style={myStyle}>Hello Style!</h1>
    </>
  );
}
```

## CSS file

The bese way in Using CSS files.
You can write your CSS styling in a separate file, just save the file with the `.css` file extension, and import it in your application.

Define your styles in a separate *.css file as usual and refer to them using `className`.

Create a file called "App.css" and insert some CSS code in it.
Import the stylesheet in your application:
```js
import "./Components/css/App.css";
function App() {
  return (
    <div className="main">
    </div>
  );
}
```

It is common for CSS classes to depend on the component props or state:
```js
render() {
  let className = 'menu';
  if (this.props.isActive) {
    className += ' menu-active';
  }
  return <span className={className}>Menu</span>
}
```

## CSS Modules

CSS Modules is not an official spec or an implementation in the browser but rather a process in a build step (with the help of Webpack or Browserify) that changes class names and selectors to be scoped (i.e. kinda like namespaced).

### Why We need CSS Modules

This approach is designed to fix the problem of the global scope in CSS.
global scope in CSS cause a lot of problem in SPA. For example, 
- you need to create many names for class, 
- you may affect other html when you modify or delete one class, etc.

### How CSS Moduels work

Here’s an example of how that might work:
```js
import styles from "./styles.css";

element.innerHTML = 
  `<h1 class="${styles.title}">
     An example heading
   </h1>`;
```

During the build step, the compiler would search through that styles.css file that we’ve imported, then look through the JavaScript we’ve written and make the `.title `class accessible via `styles.title`. Our build step would then process both these things into **new**, separate HTML and CSS files, with a new string of characters replacing both the HTML class and the CSS selector class.

Our generated HTML might look like this:
```html
<h1 class="_styles__title_309571057">
  An example heading
</h1>
```
Our generated CSS might look like this:
```css
._styles__title_309571057 {
  background-color: red;
}
```

### Use CSS Modules

A CSS Module stylesheet is similar to a regular stylesheet, only with a different extension (e.g. styles.module.css). 
CSS Modules allows us to use the same class name in multiple files without clashes.

> The CSS inside a module is available only for the component that imported it. 
{: .block-warning}

1. Create the CSS module with the `.module.css` extension, example: `my-style.module.css`.
my-style.module.css:
```css
.bigblue {
  color: DodgerBlue;
  padding: 40px;
  font-family: Sans-Serif;
  text-align: center;
}
```
2. Import the stylesheet in your component:
```js
import styles from './my-style.module.css'; 
const Car = () => {
  return <h1 className={styles.bigblue}>Hello Car!</h1>;
}
export default Car;
```
Because it is referenced as a js object, so No clashes from other `.bigblue` class names

## CSS-in-JS

“CSS-in-JS” refers to a pattern where CSS is composed using JavaScript instead of defined in external files.
This functionality is not a part of React, but provided by third-party libraries.

Popular libraries like: styled-components, Emotion. 
More information [here](/blog/2024/css-in-js/).

## Using Sass in React

If you use the `create-react-app` in your project, you can easily install and use Sass in your React projects.
Install SASS: `npm i sass`
After Sass installation, you can include Sass files in the React project.
SASS file:
```css
$myColor: red;
h1 {
  color: $myColor;
}
```
React: 
```js
import './my-sass.scss';
const Header = () => {
  return (
    <>
      <h1>Hello Style!</h1>
      <p>Add a little style!.</p>
    </>
  );
}
```

## References

- [css-modules](https://github.com/css-modules/css-modules)
