---
layout: post
title: REST API Overview
date: 2025-01-11
categories: Programming
tags: REST Http CORS
toc: 
  - name: What is REST API
  - name: Some terms
---

## What is REST API

REpresentational State Transfer (REST) is an architectural style that defines a set of constraints to be used for creating web services. 

### Features
- A web API that obeys the REST constraints is informally described as RESTful. 
- REST is a software architectural style.
- REST API is a way of accessing web services in a simple and flexible way without having any processing knowledge.
- In a RESTful Web service, requests made to a resource's URI elicit a response with a payload formatted in JSON, or other format. 
- supports JSON and XML languages.
- Provides error information to the developer and the reason for the error
- REST API’s are stateless
- A uniform interface is crucial to ensure decoupling the client from server and allow independent evolution of the application.
- REST operates entirely on the HTTP protocol
- Optimized Code Encapsulation

### REST constraints (principles)
- client–server architecture, 
- statelessness, 
- cacheability, 
- use of a layered system, 
- support for code on demand, 
- and using a uniform interface. 

These principles must be followed for the system to be classified as RESTful.

The classic example of a non-RESTful system using HTTP is something which treats HTTP as if it was a transport protocol, and with every request sends a POST of data to the same URI which is then acted upon in an RPC-like manner, possibly with the connection itself having shared state.
For example, GraphQL is not RESTful.

## REST and CORS



## Some terms

- **RESTful Web services** allow the requesting systems to access and manipulate textual representations of Web resources by using a uniform and predefined set of stateless operations.
- **SOAP** is a protocol. Unlike SOAP-based Web services, there is no "official" standard for RESTful Web APIs. This is because REST is an architectural style. It is not protocol. 
- **Swagger** is an Interface Description Language for describing RESTful APIs expressed using JSON. Swagger is used together with a set of open-source software tools to design, build, document, and use RESTful web services. Swagger includes automated documentation, code generation (into many programming languages), and test-case generation.
- **HTTP API**: A RESTful API adheres ALL the REST constraints set out in its "format" documentation. A HTTP API is ANY API that makes use of HTTP as their transfer protocol. This means that even SOAP can be considered a HTTP API, as long as it will use HTTP for transport. RESTful API can based on HTTP or other protocol. 
Most HTTP APIs can be very close to becoming a truly RESTful API. Depend on the [Glory of REST Model](https://martinfowler.com/articles/richardsonMaturityModel.html)


