---
layout: post
title: AI Agent
date: 2025-03-05
categories: AI
tags: AI 
---

## What is AI Agent

AI Agent is like an expert designed to help with tasks and answer questions. E.g. coding agent, marketing agent, learning agent or just a friend.

An artificial intelligence (AI) agent refers to a system or program that is capable of autonomously performing tasks on behalf of a user or another system by designing its workflow and utilizing available tools.

AI agents can encompass a wide range of functionalities beyond natural language processing including decision-making, problem-solving, interacting with external environments and executing actions.

AI agents can encompass a wide range of functionalities beyond natural language processing including decision-making, problem-solving, interacting with external environments and executing actions.

## Explain
What is NOT AI agent? When you are using prompt to ask ChatGPT directly, for example, ask it 'please write out an essay on Topic XXX from start to end in one go'. This is not AI Agent. 
Probably charGPT still give you some information, but They are possibly not the thing you are looking for. For the complicated topic, Agentic workflow can significantly improve the result. Basically, it is breaking the topic into many steps, it also include iteration, revise, etc. 

### Important terms

- circulation
- external tools



LLM
BERT
Reflection

OpenAI - GPT, DALL·E, Sora

Gemini - ormerly known as Bard, is a generative artificial intelligence chatbot developed by Google. Based on the large language model (LLM) of the same name, it was launched in 2023 in response to the rise of OpenAI's ChatGPT. It was previously based on the LaMDA and PaLM LLMs.

Anthropic - Claude
xAI - Grok
Qwen
DeepSeek
Llama